---
layout: post
author: Taha El Hajji
category: entrepreneurship
summary: Information can be a bless but sometimes it’s a temporary curse that pushes us to make our own bless. In the age of Facebook, Gene mapping, X-47B drones, Baidu, Spotify, iPhones, iPads and all the other great successes that blogs and magazines diligently rub in our faces every day, information becomes, more often than not, a source of frustration (a curse). Sometimes you just wish you didn’t know.
title: Time for a change! Who's in? 
--- 

Information can be a bless but sometimes it’s a temporary curse that pushes us to make our own bless. In the age of Facebook, Gene mapping, X-47B drones, Baidu, Spotify, iPhones, iPads and all the other great successes that blogs and magazines diligently rub in our faces every day, information becomes, more often than not, a source of frustration (a curse). Sometimes you just wish you didn’t know.

Frustration develops through a long process that starts with an innocent ambition, turns into a dare, becomes a challenge, then transforms into an impulsive jump into the unknown that feels so good. Until it doesn’t. At all. Shortly thereafter, come the loads of “I told you” from the Naysayers who make sure to seize the moment to indulge in their sadist pleasures. Hell, they even keep repeating it in sequences “I told you, I told you, I told you…”. Showing you that they are more intelligent and that they know better but, most of all, making sure that you go back to the norm, that you don’t make the exception, so you protect their inner peace by confirming that their settlement for mediocrity is inevitable. The only way for them to internalize their failures is by externalizing the guilt; blaming it on someone. It is an everyday discourse that keeps being repeated until at some point you get the feeling that you are living in a society of victims. Man! Everyone is a victim? Where are the criminals? The answer to that is pretty much everyone who made it. It is so instilled in our common consciousness that even the successful develops a mild feeling of guilt. 

So those who succeed are guilty, those who don’t are hanged on spikes so that no one dares try. 

The result is a conformist society that functions by imitation and where innovation is unheard of. 

Between the fear of spikes and the fear of guilt, brilliant ideas get stifled and are never executed. Instead, those ideas become an externalizing tool. They morph into the famous questioning form “why don’t they do this and that?”. It is particularly interesting how, during those sessions of trivial talk, no one ever asks “they? Who?”. The question is so evident yet rarely asked. It sounds like some extraterrestrial form of life has the monopoly of doing. If the question is ever asked, the answer is usually “the government” (my personal favorite) or “those who have the means”. Seriously? Those answers don’t sound suspicious to you?

It is time for a change! Let’s flip that rampant questioning form on its head to start a new trend of “why don’t I do it?”. To do that, we are launching "The Escaped" to be a curse for the whiner and an inspiration for the go-getter to push for the creation of a blessed society.In other words, we will rub it in your face till you get off the victims bench and go make the world what you think it should be.
