
---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
date: 2012-9-26 19:29:9
summary: This weekend, a Pakistani minister offered a $100,000 bounty for anyone who would dare kill the maker of "Innocence of Muslims", inflaming what has been for weeks a clash of world views. A reading into the sources of Muslim leaders' denial.
title: The Case for the American Way - 3
---

(You can find the first two parts of this article "here":http://descaped.com/politics/)

When legitimately and duly implemented, law can be a powerful thing. In the United States, you can be Muslim, Jewish, Christian, Atheist, Hindu, Sikh or even Satanic (see First Amendment above). But the community, city, state and country you live in are bound by a single document. A social contract that is the fruit of years of struggle and civil war, made possible by the sacrifice of people who dared to dream of freedom. When I read the Constitution of the United States, I find it hard to believe that more than two centuries ago, a group of men sat together and thought that unless they figure out a way to get religion, speech and the press out of the hands of government institutions, their homework of laying out the country’s foundations would be incomplete. Therein was a firm conviction in the huge diversity of human thought and opinion. It’s good to have a strong and balanced government. It’s even better to balance it with a constitutionally empowered civil society. As an American citizen, you can argue your way through sometimes the most ridiculous endeavours in court based on the First Amendment to the Constitution. In contemporary US Supreme Court history, the First Amendment has served as evidence to lift limits on corporate campaign funding (based on the wild assumption that money is a form of speech), decriminalize smoking Peyote for Native Americans (because their religion requires it), or assert that CBS was not at fault by showing a naked bottom to its viewers (it is, after all, a body of the press). Questionable on many grounds, but healthy in its essence. Being capable of challenging those who make the decisions for us is a virtue in itself. The fact that the three domains of speech, religion and the press were to be left to the individual realm in the United States should be nothing surprising to us Muslims, or to any other religious or ethnic group.

When has our power as a religious block started to be measured by our ability to shut our critics up? Are we as self-centered as to believe that the world should either love us or fear the might of our anger? Is everybody out there just wrong but us? How do we conceive of a world where there is no room for even the most stupid or ridiculous things to be said?

The killing of Ambassador Stevens in Lybia, so closely synchronized with the release of the trailer to “Innocence of Muslims” on Youtube, was in all aspects a tragedy. But frankly I see a bright side in the midst of all the violence taking place in the streets. A perverted part of me hopes for this nonsense to continue for a while. I sincerely wish for the causes of such an uninformed reactivity to be brought under the spotlight. In an overcrowded rally held to protest against the movie, Hassan Nasrallah, leader of Hezbolah, accused US intelligence services of being behind the idea of the video. I cannot think of any scenario in which the leader of such a powerful and overreaching organization would genuinely believe that. Nasrallah, under the veil of anti-imperialist Holy war, is exploiting the current events, lying to the masses and manipulating their ignorance for political gain. So is Ahmadinejad in Iran. Beyond the offensive nature of the video, the stakes for Middle Eastern regimes are quite high. None of these leaders would like to be subject to a political context where something like the First Amendment exists, allowing their citizens to scrutinize them at will. It is then easy to understand why Nasrallah and Ahmadinejad are so insistent on supporting Bashar Al Assad while he butchers his own people. An educated and intellectually emancipated population is difficult to govern.

I do not need an Imam, President or any supposed “role model” to tell me how to react to what an emotionally challenged individual says he thinks of my prophet. Neither do you, fellow Muslims. My stance is doubtless making you label me as a fan of America. I very much am. What I hope I made you understand is why. Freedom of speech is one of the many constitutional attributes that have contributed to making America the strong nation it is today. Hating it for that is void of sense. We have tried censorship and uniform mindsets. They failed miserably. Let’s try something else.

