(You can read the first part of this article "here":http://descaped.com/politics/2012/09/17/The-Case-for-the-American-Way-1.html)


Cultural sensitivity is a tricky business. It is quite understandable that those who are used to oppressive, paternalistic and centralized forms of governance see things through a lense other than those whose whole constitutional culture is based on limiting the power of government. For the former, some things you just must not say. By law. In most countries in the Middle East & North Africa, you do not mess with religion, especially Islam. A large crowd of Muslims are there to make sure you do not. And what they are really doing is just enforcing the laws of their country (although it is supposed to be the cops' work). I would like to play the devil's advocate and explain to my American friends why they should be a little more considerate even in the face of the savagery taking place in front of their embassies:

We were born in political and legal environments of which Islam is the code of life. That code is used to justify all kinds of irrational and inhuman (inter)actions that are supposed to take place between us and those who govern us. The sources of this include the fact that passage of power in our monarchies, tribes and theocracies is based on the established fact that the governing dynasties are descendents of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). Nowhere in Islamic references is it dictated that power should be inherited ("Their system is based on their consultation, (42:38)"), but never mind. So you understand that Islam is essential for our ruling elites to stay in power and that therefore they would use it exhaustively in laying out their countries' laws and customs. As a Muslim in the Middle East and North Africa, everything is done to make sure that an autocratic reading of Islam follows you from kintergarden, to College, to work, to your personal life, to marriage... This way, there would be little chance for people to rationally question the status quo enforced by those who used Islam to control them in the first place. I offer you these astonishing excerpts of thinking inside the box:

-"Publications and the press have freedom of expression except when it is detrimental to the fundamental principles of Islam or the rights of the public. The details of this exception will be specified by law." (Section 3, Article 24) - Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran

-"Information, publication, and all other media shall employ courteous language and the state's regulations, and they shall contribute to the education of the nation and the bolstering of its unity.  All acts that foster sedition or division or harm the state's security and its public relations or detract from man's dignity and rights shall be prohibited.  The statutes shall define all that." (Article 39) - Constitution of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

(Amazingly, my country of origin which defines itself as a Muslim country holds no such exceptions to free speech: "The freedoms of thought, of opinion and of expression under all their forms [,] are guaranteed. The freedoms of creation, of publication and of presentation [exposition] in literary and artistic maters and of scientific and technical research[,] are guaranteed" (Article 25). Why do you think I'm daring to write this?)

I don't think I need to remind you that Egypt and Libya, which have witnessed some of the wildest and deadliest anti-American protests so far, have not ratified any constitution yet. Which means there is no law, but also that anything can be law. That void is for now filled by religion, which the most radical Muslims are illegitimately using to fuel what Salman Rushdie has recently called "an Industry of Outrage". And no one better than Rushdie knows what can happen when a bounty is put on your head in the name of Islam.

Think of it like watching "Inception". Along the way, things get out of hand. Telling the average Muslim Middle Eastern or North African that their way is not the only way is like telling a two year old that Santa Clause does not exist. They're just not ready for that kind of revelation yet. You see, Americans, not every country's founding fathers were as far sighted as to think of a way to prevent the ruling elites from silencing their citizenry. Way back in 1791, yours definitely were. In 2012, most of us over here still do not get it.

My next gesture is to now turn toward my fellow Muslims around the world. I know many of you have stopped reading my article way before these lines. But for those with enough curiosity and emotional stamina, here is, in four lines, why you have absolutely nothing to hold against the American stupid amateur who deliberately insulted our religion and our prophet more than a week ago:

"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances." (First Amendment to the United States Constitution, 1791)

To put this landmark piece of legal reference into context, I would like to quote my favourite contemporary novelist:

"In America, there [are] people who [believe] in damned near anything, and there [is] a constitutional right to be an ass." (Clancy, 1997) - Executive Orders

If we Arabs and Muslims are so concerned of the American interventionism in our region of the world, then we should know better than to dismiss the fact that the United States of America is governed by American law. Not Moroccan law. Not Pakistani law. Not Sudanese law. American law. The latter is enforced within the borders of the United States of America (which - news flash - includes the premises of its embassies all over the world). That is the main reason the maker of the offensive video about Prophet Muhammad could drive home safe without fear of prosecution from the United States government. Actually, the United States federal government is bound by law to protect him from the prosecution of, say, the State of California. This is what American federal office holders are sworn in to do after every election: "Preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States". We can spend hours stressing the bad nature of anyone who willingly offends others' beliefs for the sake of provocation and argue about the morality of such an act. But here is my point: societies are not supposed to be governed by morality. They must be governed by law.

(Stay tuned for the third and last part of the article!)
