---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
summary: The slaughtering of the Syrian people by a savage regime is being performed in defense of a strong Arab Nation. The realities of a rarely questioned and failing paradigm of identity.
title: The Curious Case of the Arab Nation 
--- 


It ain’t easy being an Arab today. All because a group of delusional sociopaths decided one day to fly a couple of planes into the buildings which (as they thought) symbolized American might. Somebody forgot to tell those retards that it takes much more than some plane crashes to bring down a world hegemon. More importantly, they also seemed to ignore the universal law of physics which clearly states that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. Okay, maybe I’m wrong on the “equal” part. The effects of 9/11 are felt today by Middle Easterns on a very large scale, be it when bombs are dropped on their homes or when they are put on separate waiting lines at every Western airport. Sometimes I wish I could meet the ghosts of the 9/11 hijackers. I would have so many questions to ask them, such as “how are these 70 virgins working out for you?” If you read what I just wrote carefully, you may have noticed that I (purposefully, I promise) made the fatal mistake of using three distinct references to point at anyone living in (or originating from) the very wide geographical region extending from Morocco at West to Pakistan at East above the Tropic of Cancer and below the 40th Parallel. “Arab”, “Middle Eastern” or “Muslim” have been merged as terms and turned into synonyms by the Western Media, Military Industrial Complex, Thinks Tanks and policymakers. Irritating. I’m no speculator, but my guess has always been that such a simplistic world view was designed in order to package the Middle East and North Africa for the average Western citizen. This way they would not have to go through the headache of scrutinizing their leaders’ foreign policy each time they go to the ballots. And who could blame them? If I was American and lost my job, my retirement savings and could not pay my mortgage, the last criterion on my mind when choosing a President would be how well they know the issues of Middle Easterns. Sorry, I meant Muslims. No, Arabs. Never mind.

However, others have not been the only ones to lump us into identity blocks depending on their agendas. We have been doing this to ourselves, since almost a century ago. To be more precise, it has been done for us. Around the 1950s, following the independence of many countries in the Middle East and North Africa, a new wave of revolutionary leaders took over, stressing the importance of Arab unity in the face of Western imperialism. Two fellas named Nasser and Assad took this even further, attempting to form a United Arab Republic. Another got inspired and pulled off a coup in Iraq. They nationalized banks, factories, canals and other valuable resources, daring the West to do something about it. Back then, you would have a hard time finding a student, opinion-maker or activist not adhering to the hot ideological trend of Arab Nationalism (probably because other trends did not get much coverage).

For decades, Arab Nationalism fed off a foreign policy issue that it wanted common to all: the Palestinian cause, also known as “The Cause”. From a very young age, kids were told at school that if Israel was defeated, Arabs would live happily ever after. Nations sent troops and went to war with Israel without being consulted, to much of their dismay. Literally fighting the whole Middle East, the Israelis defeated each and every contender, as if they had some kind of superpower. They did have one, by the way. Its name was America. Now if the Anti-American in you is tempted to explain Israel’s supremacy solely by the fact that it had American military hardware, you might want to hold that thought for a while. Because the Egyptians, Syrians and other Arab leaders then had Soviet weapons, and not any type. The good stuff. MiGs, Sukhois and the whole armada. And now that we’re back on the same frequency of rational thinking, let’s reflect under the reasonable assumption that in order to understand why Arabs always lose to Israel, we should first compare both as separate entities.

It goes without saying that at its foundation, Israel had an unfair advantage: the active backing of the British Empire. If the Palestinian-Israeli conflict was a soccer game, then the score was something like 3-0 in favor of Israel before the game even started. History does not tend to forget that kind of injustice. I am in favor of a fully independent, effectively sovereign Palestinian state by the closest deadlines, to which Palestinian refugees all over the world could go back and synergize their skills in order to build a strong nation. The reason for my position is not the fact that I speak Arabic, or because I am Muslim. My sympathy toward the Palestinian cause is nothing different from the Dutch young man who volunteers to go to Gaza via the Red Cross, or the British lady who sends a £20 check to Palestinian hospitals through Oxfam. It stems from the universal, innate belief that Justice should be done to those who have been harmed. As the Palestinian State is a must, we should all bear in mind that it would be in its best interest to resemble none the Arab states surrounding it. None whatsoever. If anything, its internal institutional culture should probably resemble Israel’s. You heard right.

It must have been hard for Nasser, Sadat, Mubarak and Assad to deal with Israel. To bring back the soccer analogy, imagine playing against a team of which the captain, striker, defense and goal keeper change every 20 minutes because their coach thinks they should. You, on the other hand, think you have enough endurance to play the whole 90 minutes. So you just refuse to be replaced, regardless of pressing demands from your teammates, and more importantly, from your coach. Each time the latter asks you to leave the field, you go punch him in the face (while the other team is scoring). Your opponents respect the will of their coach, consult with him on a regular basis. And they keep scoring.

The people are the coach. At least they’re supposed to be. Claiming an almost spiritual perennity, Arab leaders grabbed onto power, using the most ruthless and vicious means. They crushed opposition groups, took religion out of the picture, implemented a unique party system, executed potential contenders for the Presidency. The facade on the other hand was grandiose. On TV, they were hailed as liberators, soldier militants for the Arab cause. Instead of elections, they held every ten years popularity contests in the form of referendums with 99 percent approval ratings. Mubarak, for instance, held in 1987, 1993, and 1999 elections in which people were supposed to vote Yes or No on him, with no other candidate allowed to run. Through this, the message to his people must have been something like "even if you don't like me, I'm all you got". Even worse, the governance culture in the region metastasized into an apologetic tone, inventing excuses for the socio-economic ills of citizens. Instead of rights, people seemed to accept a false sense of "stability". Instead of aspiring for better more affordable social services, they silently watched them being privatized to cigar club friends of the Regime. Between the 1970s and the 1990s, a generation of brainwashed middle class grew up aspiring for nothing more than financial security and other basics of life. They too, kept believing in the "Arab Dream". A song of the exact latter name was quite the hit in 1999. It carried a tone nostalgic for greater times when Arabs ruled over half the world. But apparently even that song was wrong. Because Arabs did not rule the world back then. Muslims did. That’s what my younger brother’s Islamic Education and History books tell him.

Longing for a false sense of greatness compared to other civilizations could be seen as a means of hiding our frustration at our failings in most development metrics. Excluding the 6 wealthy oil-producing countries of the GCC, the Human Development Index holds quite a grim outlook for the the Middle East and North Africa, especially with regard to the role of youth and women in economic development. My choice for mentioning human development instead of pure aggregate economic data comes from my personal encountering of the notorious "The Whole World is in Crisis" excuse more than once. Human Development is a clear illustration of how well society is doing with regard to the tools essential for any human advancement: education, health and living standards. For Arab countries, the latter is volatile, partly depending on the amount of natural resources they sit on. Yet it is also a function of the former. So if you're an Arab country and you don't happen to sit on vast reserves of oil and gas, you better educate your people. The right way. A 2010 UNDP report emphasizes the fact that Arab education programs, despite all advertised reforms, are totally unfit for the modern economy. Arab kids, teenagers and College students are fed large amounts of useless information instead of skills (meanwhile, the personal biographies of Arab leaders reveal that they all sent their kids to study in Europe or the United States - they knew how bad it was). The result is a bleeding epidemic of unemployment that has been limiting the aspirations of more than one generation. If you're severely worried about whether you can afford the rent (that's if you do not still live at your parents'), transportation or even your daily meals, you have every incentive not to look at the big scheme of things and try to change it. But eventually, you are going to.

That is what the Tunisians, Egyptians, Lybians and Yemenis taught us. That is what the brave Syrians dying in Homs as I am writing these words are teaching us. The longing for freedom, independence and opportunity is a universal human feature which sometimes just needs a trigger. The fact that Ancient Greeks developed the concept of Democracy, with all the material and technological limitations that they had, is the best proof to it. It was in Washington, DC, of all places, that I had my first encounter with the apologetic view of politics in the Middle East. While discussing the need for reform with an Arab friend, the latter threw the most unsound argument at me: "Democracy is not for us". One of those landmark moments when I realized how limited my anger management skills are. Why wouldn't it be? More alarmingly, how special are we as a pseudo-race to dismiss such an important prerequisite for human progress? Is being Arab just synonymous of adhering to tribal and paternalistic styles of government and management? And what is an Arab anyway?

If I had to look at myself in a mirror, the list of identity patterns I would extract could not fit in a wall. I live in Morocco. Of course I speak Arabic, it's my mother tongue. So that makes me an Arab. But Arabic is not my favourite language. English is (go figure why). Also looking at my skin tone I can pretty much say that quite a substantial percentage of my ancestors were African. I wear European clothing. That's the type of clothing I feel the most comfortable in. My favourite Moroccan meal, after Couscous, was first cooked in Jewish families. It's called "Skhina" and it tastes so good. My intellectual inspirations come from Anglo-Saxon philosophers, poets, writers, thinkers, economists and politicians. I cannot claim to have known about all others but so far, they're the ones who won my heart. A lot of my moral code comes from teachings of the Islamic religion. Yet I reserve the right to heavily scrutinize any thought that commits the grave sin of excess. I don't like Arab music. Actually everytime Rotana is on TV I feel like unplugging the satellite dish. It is a matter of personal preference, and sometimes even I cannot explain why.

Arab much?

Just like you, I am a citizen of the world. And the world is quite a big place. This entails that competing in it is a comprehensive and exhaustive task, requiring an objective effort of introspection, assessment, bargaining, and benchmarking from others. Our woes are mainly the unfortunate cumulative result of our excessive pride, prejudices and cultural rigidity - and the ones of our leaders. The troubles of the people in the Middle East and North Africa cannot always be blamed on former colonizers, or The United States and Israel.

Despite its very comdemnable foreign policy, Israel is not a strong nation because it defeats Arab states. It defeats Arab states because it is a strong nation. It has through its (very short) existence founded and built a stable democracy with a clear system of checks and balances: a popularly elected parliament, an executive and an independent judiciary. The press is not restrained, freedom of speech is protected and research is encouraged and financed in Universities. Israeli office holders are held accountable for every single misstep. Prosecutors can take officials to court on any charges. Accused of corruption and criticized for his mismanagement of the 2006 war with Lebanon, Olmert (former Israeli Prime Minister) declared in 2008: "I am proud to be the Prime Minister of a country that investigates its Prime Ministers". Perhaps until the Arab Spring of 2011, no Arab leader could have uttered a statement like this one. Israeli nation-building has been fruitful on many grounds. Israel's external force is not only related to its possession of nuclear warheads or the size of its security forces. Israel is powerful because in Israel, every single Israeli citizen matters. This is why after the massacre of its 1972 Olympic team in Munich, it sent undercover agents to track Palestinian militants all over the world for almost a decade. This is why in 2011, it released hundreds of Palestinian prisoners to get back one soldier: Gilad Shalit. Do not make me perform the same analysis for the United States. I don't know about any of you Arab readers but I am pretty sure that if I get kidnapped somewhere around the world, my government will have other worries than to come look for me. It would be too busy controlling the people it has inside its borders.

Our problems are what they are: our problems. Claiming that corruption, clientelism and oppression are phenomena exclusive to the Middle East and North Africa would be a grave betrayal to the Universalist that I am. But it is fair to admit that in our case, they have lasted too long. With historically unforgiveable repercussions. I do not believe that this region of the planet is destined to lag behind in the chain of Evolution. Yet it is frustrating to see that we have just begun processes that the British, French or Americans have triggered centuries ago. Back then they had no Twitter. They had no Facebook. And even after drafting their constitutions, they had to amend them numerous times in response to rising social challenges. Nationalism was not what drove such progress. It was a governance approach that put the human being at the center of every policy. What makes nations great is how well they treat their own people.

So step down, Bashar.