---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
date: 2012-9-17 22:19:28
summary: Another graphic criticism of Islam has been made public from California. Practically willing to be offended, Muslims stormed to US embassies in every Middle Eastern capital, fatally taking out their anger on American diplomats, restaurant chains and flags. What Muslims can learn from America's constitutional protection of its lunatics.
title: The Case for the American Way - 1
---

I like to watch the news on "Mute" mode. It gives me the upper hand in interpreting what I see through my own perspective, free of the biased reporting of any ideological agenda out there. This week, I grew tired of watching the same image over and over again on nearly every news channel. Pictures of the American flag being burned in Cairo, Tunis, Karachi or Khartoum have brought nothing in the way of novelty. We've been there. Whether American troops attack a Middle Eastern country, or Israel bombs Gaza, or an American citizen says something stupid about Islam for the purpose of criticism or humour... Our reaction is the same. We blame Western citizens for the decisions of their governments, and governments for the actions of their citizens. So we go out to the streets and burn their flags; what we see as the ultimate symbol of their culture, identity and way of life. As the 1995 Rap hit so eloquently puts it, "This is how we do it".

As I was watching young Pakistanis stepping on a burned out Stars and Stripes banner, I silently wondered whether Americans would be so willing to burn any symbol of Muslim identity in retaliation to us calling them Infidels at every possible occasion. Needless to say, every civilization is spiced up by its hord of crazies. As recently as 2010, the notorious Pastor Terry Jones did play with the nerves of Muslims around the world and American diplomats, intelligence officers, policymakers and soldiers when he threatened to organize a day of Quran burning in Florida. Fortunately for everyone (and I do mean everyone), he refrained from doing so at the last hours. On the other hand, do you know what American citizens have been rather successful at burning? The American flag. Yes. People in the United States of America can burn the American flag in protest and be free from the prosecution of the United States government. In other words, I can take the next plane to New York, go straight to Time Square, burn an American flag in it then get back home unharmed. Something I cannot possibly dream of in Morocco if I ever decide to mess with the Moroccan flag. Thanks to a 1989 Supreme Court decision (Texas Vs. Johnson), flag burning has been incorporated as a form of free speech, protected under the First Amendment to the US Constitution. Let's be honest. You can only applaud a nation that goes out of its way to protect the right of those who do not like it to harmlessly express themselves. And that is, ladies and gentlemen, one of the many reasons I have been in love with America since I was twenty. 

It wasn't easy at first. The idea of America came out to me like that girl you are attracted to but never want to admit it to yourself. It sure as hell was not easy given the fact that every Arabic and Islamic Education teacher since grade school was warning us about the Zionist threat looming over our generation, sponsored by Uncle Sam and orchestrated by The Jews. As teenagers, we grew up listening to 50 Cent, eating Big Macs but hating America because we were told it was the personification of the Great Satan. At 15, I was loudly and publicly praised by my Arabic teacher for writing an Arabic piece of prose in defense of the Palestinian cause, in which I had trashed every non-Muslim being on this planet. Beyond pride, it had given me a false sense of intellectual purpose which teenagers at that age so desperately long for. I followed the anti-American fashion of the time, fueled by the aggressive foreign policy of neoconservatives in the Middle East. Events like the Intifada and the War in Iraq marked my generation. The turning point to me was watching the anti-American crusade take place at home. People who were blown up in Casablanca in 2003 were not Marines or GIs. Just regular folks trying to have a good time. Perhaps even the soldiers being targeted in Iraq and Afghanistan were not to blame for following the orders of their Commander in Chief. From that moment on, that thought process triggered a series of self-inflicted revelations which made my world view what is it today. I have been trying to reach that Arabic professor for years now. I really need ten minutes with the guy for some closure.

How on earth could I hate something I knew nearly nothing about?

(The second half of this article will be available to you tomorrow. Stay tuned!)

