---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
summary: Watching the news lately can be quite depressing. Sure, the world is in the toilet and we all know it. Overzealous jerks make wild bets, things go wrong, banks (private and central) collapse, businesses can’t do business. Then they fire people. And this is where trouble begins for everyone. In College, I always wondered why the indisputable variable for measuring the health of an economy was unemployment rate instead of growth. As of a year ago, I stopped wondering. Unemployment numbers are the nightmare of any politician, executive, analyst, investor, factory worker, journalist… They trigger social unrest, increase crime and divorce rates, install an atmosphere of distrust and ultimately topple governments. Berlusconi and Zapatero know what I’m talking about. Careful, Obama.
title: The Secret Life of the Un(der)employed
---

Watching the news lately can be quite depressing. Sure, the world is in the toilet and we all know it. Overzealous jerks make wild bets, things go wrong, banks (private and central) collapse, businesses can’t do business. Then they fire people. And this is where trouble begins for everyone. In College, I always wondered why the indisputable variable for measuring the health of an economy was unemployment rate instead of growth. As of a year ago, I stopped wondering. Unemployment numbers are the nightmare of any politician, executive, analyst, investor, factory worker, journalist… They trigger social unrest, increase crime and divorce rates, install an atmosphere of distrust and ultimately topple governments. Berlusconi and Zapatero know what I’m talking about. Careful, Obama. 

But that is all unemployment is at the policy and planning level: a number, preferably low. A whole paradigm of theories has been developed using the most sophisticated mathematics in order to find and prescribe the best recipe to keep people at work. People won Nobel Prizes for that. I have a near-religious respect for the world of academia, but as a young man with deep personal experience in the matter, I fiercely believe that thinking of unemployment solely in technical terms is bullshit. Excuse my French.

 

Beyond the economic nature of it, unemployment is above all a social and psychological issue. Thus its study should be taken over by the realm of Humanities for a change. Suppose we discard the aggregate percentage sent to us by Economists every month and instead ask for individual lists of people out of work. Suppose each one of them is studied thoroughly, just like alcoholics are. Without exaggeration, the results would very much change our understanding of human nature. I know. My name is Zouhair and I am a workaholic. I’ve been sober for one year now. Yet I cannot claim to have been representative of the average unemployed Moroccan, mainly for two reasons.

First, I live in a country where there is a prevailing culture of freeriding. People in Morocco tend to require employment from the government just like they require free education, universal impeccable health care, food and oil subsidies. Lately, a growing self-proclaimed movement of “Unemployed Executives” freshly graduated from College seemed to totally forget the basics of labor: it is a market like others, with a supply and demand. On TV, radio, newspapers and social media, the “Unemployed Executives” staged a public relations offensive at the government, threatening it of catastrophic repercussions if they do not get a public service posting. Five of them burned themselves, unaware that if the government gave each one of them an office and a salary, then there would probably be no government anymore.

Second, the demands of such groups in my country ignore fundamental parameters such as skill and personal career aspirations. And this is where the social and psychological aspect of unemployment kicks in. Asking for any public sector job reveals hidden doubt in one’s abilities, because a government desk job is the guarantee that you will get a monthly paycheck regardless of your performance. Blame the Education Ministry, which will in turn blame the Finance Ministry… But that’s another story.

I never thought of any of these things. I was already aware that graduating from College would be like jumping off a bridge, to a river of destructive and unrealistic social expectations. Because College life is like a fairy tale. When all you are expected to do is learn how to reflect on the world around you, you start seeing things in black and white. Mostly white. By the age of 23, I was under the very intoxicating impression that the world was just waiting for ambitious idealistic smart asses to make it a better place. Little did I know that the world owed me nothing. I took for granted the fact that life was about finding something you’re good at, sticking to it and realizing your full potential. Makes sense, doesn’t it? Well, no it doesn’t.

From 2006 to 2010, I think I may have forgotten that I lived in a third world country poorly ranked in terms of good governance, human development, and socio-economic policies. In the global economy, countries like this are the ideal target of multinational companies for cheap labor. I’m talking call centers, data entry, and other very fulfilling sectors. I was too proud to even look that way. I was taught calculus, science, economics, finance and international law. I had navigated world cultures in search of meaning. I had managed complex projects. I had engaged in Research, not as a requirement, but as a passion. I had made sure to diversify my academic background to include Business, Humanities and some basic Computer Science. Killing my skill set in a low level job was not an option. Pride was my sin. And just like all sins, it did not go unpunished. The light at the end of the tunnel was hard to see, mostly because I was blind.

Today, despite much trials, I still stick by the conviction that work should be a place to exercise one’s passions and not just a way to make a living. Evidence is overwhelmingly on my side of the argument. Those who changed the world were always people challenging popular conceptions of success and social status, dropping out of school or quitting a boring job because they felt they had so much to offer. They didn’t know it, they just felt it. Knowledge of their full potential came after their success. I’ve been told Silicon Valley is full of those kinds. The emotional component of our aspirations is what sets us apart. So my guess is that if you're a big dreamer, you just have to keep dreaming.