---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: education
title: It's not why you went to school
summary: Fueling the passions of millions, Education has oftentimes been blamed for the waves of unemployment among today's youth. What seems to be missing from the discussion is an understanding of the extra-material virtues of attending school.
---

On a pleasant June afternoon, I was lazily getting sunburned when I decided to check out what the Newsweek Magazine copy I had just bought was reporting about world matters. Opening it made me wish I had not. The front page article, named “Generation Screwed”, portrayed the stern and depressing faces of people my age who accepted to get interviewed by the publication on their most pressing concern: joblessness. The consensus among them was that today’s global economic environment made it impossible for them to find job opportunities suitable to their educational backgrounds. Citing very discouraging data sets, the author was deliberately highlighting the firm conviction of contemporary youth that their economic fortunes were not even remotely likely to equate those of their parents, let alone exceed them. Many questioned whether their degrees had any use at all. In the midst of all that drama being thrown at my face (and reminding me of my semi-conscious state of underemployment), one thought went through my head and slid across my spine, making me feel quite uncomfortable. These “Gen Y”ers were implicitly admitting that they went to College for the simple straightforward endeavor of socio-economic advancement. And you see, I have a very big problem with that mindset.

Economics matter. Contemporary societies seem to have devised uniform paths for material success. Parents are advised to take their toddlers to kindergarten, so that primary school is easier. Later, secondary and high school await them with new challenges. And they better make it to College. Otherwise, the Myth goes that they will lead a miserable life of blue-coller servitude, all doors of opportunity shut at them. For those fortunate enough to obtain a College degree, the Myth reserves rosier destinies. A high-paying desk job, the financial independence of which is empowering enough for one to get a car, a house... (a spouse?). They would later have kids of their own, to whom the Myth would be meticulously instructed. If I recall, they call this the Cycle of Life. No wait, that was in Biology.

In my country, Education is a domain of increased speculation, electoral bargaining and freeriding by special interest groups - the most notorious of which are teachers' unions. It is also a domain of deep National shame. Ranked 130th on a list of 187 countries worlwide in the UNDP's  Human Development Index, Morocco seems to produce graduates that are utterly unfit for an increasingly interconnected information-based global economy. Described by the World Bank in 2012 as "very serious", the unemployment epidemic that is eating Morocco's youth from the inside out is making many blame the state for having failed at delivering the job-earning education that Moroccans who studied abroad appear to have obtained. Throwing money at the problem does not seem to work either. Education represents a mind blowing 25% of the Moroccan government's budget. 44 Billion Dirhams were spent on the sector in 2011. No productivity seems to unfold from the huge influx of taxpayer money. And maybe that's the problem. The issue is not economics, but culture.

There is no denying that I was required from an early age to adhere to the Myth. My parents, as caring and concerned as any parent would be, were quite explicit in their expectations. When it came to school and academics, there was no room for error. Failure was not an option. Earning their praise had to come through a chronologically sustained set of top grades. It ended up shaping my psychological fabric as an overcompetitive nerd. During that upbringing however, something beautiful also happened.

Having successfully crossed the make-it-or-break-it Baccalaureate hurdle, I found myself in a world of unlimited access to knowledge. Books, online databases, classes, tutorials, conferences and publications. It was all mine. At the same time shocked and happy to leave my hometown, I found refuge in the world of ideas. The Liberal Arts system that guided my undergraduate passage was what it was: liberal. There was no knowing enough. The pursuit of knowledge for the sake of it proved to be a very arousing activity. I learned that things were never what they seemed to be. I learned to disconnect myself from my background, emotions, biases and intentions when thinking of a problem. I learned that the best way to assert my own convictions was to challenge them over and over again. I learned that the human race was meant to evolve, and that the best way for it to do so was to know more. Maslow told me that my needs were complex but structured. Adam Smith revealed to me that out there was a big market, which entailed that there was no free lunch. Nye dissected and rationalized geopolitical dynamics into a series of interwined actors, which meant that I had to stop watching Aljazeera Arabic. Shakespeare made me fall in love with a simple yet mysterious language. Along the road came Aristotle, Kant, Nietchze and Sartre to shake my perceptions of Right and Wrong. One thing I nevertheless knew to be Right no matter what: it was imperative that such a quest never stops. Ever. Because at the end of the day, employed or not, that is what made me a better person. The ability and willingness to be informed in order to make sound decisions. Much of the sanity I was able to keep despite the unreasonable post-College social expectations is solely owed to my firm belief in knowledge as a core value.

Approaching Education as just a stepping stone toward financial independence is equivalent to taking an elevator to reach a higher floor. You're just taking the elevator because you don't feel like climbing the stairs. You don't care how the elevator looks. You don't necessarily enjoy your ride in it. All you care about is that it gets you to the desired floor. And once you're there, you never look back. Nor are you likely to look down, as a matter of fact. What you don't know is that the elevator has been used so much that unless it is thoroughly maintained, it won't be able to lift anybody up anymore. Meanwhile, more and more people are willing to ride it, just to get up. 

In a time when knowledge is the new capital, it is time to restore Education's rightful place as the catalyst for a healthier advancement of mankind. Our very survival depends on it.

