---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
date: 2012-11-7 21:24:48
summary: Obama's sweeping reelection has been largely attributed to the fundamental changes in American culture, demography and social dynamics. However, world events seem to suggest that this is not a uniquely American phenomenon.
title: The International Death of Conservatism
---

“Change is the law of life. And those who look only to the past or present are certain to miss the future. “ - John F. Kennedy 

In Syria, the heir to a despotic dynasty of unique party rulers is asked to leave power and retaliates by killing his own people. They’re still bravely fighting him.

In Lebanon, Hezbollah is trying to divert attention from the political tectonic shifts shaking up the Middle East by professing support for the Syrian regime, reinforcing anti-Western rhetoric and blowing up cars. Behind it the Iranian regime, so anxious of being the next to fall, is accelerating the pace of its nuclear buildup and planning to isolate its population from the World Wide Web.

In Pakistan, Taliban shoots a teenager who has been encouraging her fellow female compatriots to fight social stigma and go to school. Young Malala is recovering from her gunshot wound in the United Kingdom. The attempt on her life has dealt a serious blow to Taliban’s popularity.

In France, the openly xenophobic policies of Nicolas Sarkozy get him ousted in the ballots. The son of an immigrant himself, he probably ignored the fact that his country was never going to be the same ethnically. Nurturing defeat, he decides to settle in Morocco, where a bulk of the immigrants he was chasing come from.

In Benghazi, the assassination of the American ambassador and his bodyguards generates a spontaneous collective condemnation from the Lybian people little expected by the radicals who thought of pulling such a stunt. My guess is that they’re not only hiding from the Marines now.

In the United States, Barack Obama’s reelection confirms the undeniable reality of an ever-diverse superpower, trumping the ignorant, sexist, racist and homophobic discourse of a rotten Republican establishment unwilling to admit its discomfort at the idea of a Black leader of the free world.

Although scattered in space, the events above have been taking place in a narrow time interval, relayed to our ears and eyes through an increasingly interconnected media environment. The common feature between them is that they clearly illustrate the clash between two global forces of thought and belief. One of stagnation and utter resistance to change; the other of progress and forward thinking. Empirical evidence seems to be suggesting a clear advantage for the latter. In contemporary ideological jargon, the tendency to prefer conventional outcomes over novel ones has often been associated with a distinctive term: Conservatism. 

Although specific in meaning, the word has nevertheless been unduly confounded with religion until they started to be seen as meaning the same thing. Events like 9/11 were not particularly helpful in eliminating such confusion. I want to make this clear enough for all readers: this article is not about religion. It is rather about a pattern of behavior that is encountered in the human experience of all fields; be it Religion, Politics, Economics or the Arts. My contention is that Conservatism in its basic design is grounded in the universal human traits of fear and greed and has nothing to do with any set of texts out there. Laws and customs are what you make of them.

Today, the simultaneous collapse of conservative forces should be surprising to none. Change is something Evolution has genetically wired us to subject ourselves to, almost by instinct, to the extent that the winners and losers of History are picked by it. Embracing the necessity of change is why the world is what it is today. It is what differentiates a tribe from a legitimate state, a young Arab Spring protester in the street from a self-proclaimed Mujaheed in Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia from Turkey… It is why we live as societies instead of beheading each other in the desert. It is why women in most parts of the world are a contributing force.  It is why I am able to type these words in a laptop instead of engraving my thoughts as symbols on a stonewall.  

Proved by Science to explain the origins of our condition, Evolution is today still denied by anyone who has a vital stake in the status quo. Dictators with a grip on power. Mullahs and Imams fearing irrelevance. Racist groups afraid of “The Other”. Plutocrats and special interests with immense wealth dreadful of the smallest increase in taxes. Misogynists thinking that the best way to control the opposite gender is to watch over their genitals. Although phased out differently in geography, Evolution’s track record is pretty explicit on its ability to make us preserve our species in more sustainable ways. And once that task is accomplished, there rarely is a going back. This however does not explain why the 2010s seem to be a period of simultaneous global economic, political and cultural shifts.

At the heart of it are obviously demographics. Today, people aged 24 or less make up almost half of Earth’s 7 billion. The United Nations’ Population Fund estimates that about 1.2 billion of these are between the ages of 10 and 19. Half the world’s population was then born in the 1980s. Their upbringing was synchronized with the jaw-dropping technological advancements of the last 30 years. Color TV, computers, mobile phones, the Internet, satellite channels and iPads. Since our early age, my generation traded in one commodity: information. Although unequally, we had access to it, were encouraged to pursue it and could do so in a faster way with time. Somehow the quick, unlimited access to data at will makes you nurture an impatient temper. An “I Want It All and I Want It Now” attitude coupled with an acute sense of evaluation. The abundance of information reinforced youth’s ability to assess it and disseminate the accurate kind of it from the phony. The advent of social media made young people producers of information instead of mere consumers. State media’s disingenuousness got exposed. Stone Age Fatwas were mocked. Protesters communicated via tweets. Freedom fighters filmed the atrocities of their repressors and posted them online. Students campaigned for progress and toured their country state by state, exponentially generating more support by sharing their experiences using mobile devices. Today more than ever, half the world has an increasingly low tolerance for nonsense. And there is a lot of the latter in Conservative thinking.

It is virtually impossible to accurately predict geopolitical outcomes. But if the pace of changes in the world today was to be transposed to the future, a few appealing scenarios seem to be inevitable. Bashar is going away. Iran and Saudi Arabia will start listening to their youth. Taliban is soon to fade away in the realm of insignificance. And Western right-wing forces are in serious existential risk. Looks like JFK was right.
