---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
summary: A Moroccan teenager's suicide over society's conspiracy to cover up her rape is stimulating a never-ending debate on women's rights. Why Moroccan women's empowerment should be conquered by women themselves.
title: You Can Do Better
--- 


In cultures where cross-gender interaction and debate are sanctioned, any man discussing womanly matters in public can find himself accused of a crime of conscience just for doing so, no matter his stance. In 2007, the late thinker Christopher Hitchens published an article titled Why Women Aren’t Funny on Vanity Fair. The purpose of the article was to provide an evolutionary explanation of why, throughout History, women found themselves less in a position to make people laugh than men. His claim was that being funny has (among other attributes) been a major asset for men in their endeavor of sexual conquest. Not necessarily the case for women. Since then and till his death, "Hitch" has been on the Western feminist hit list. Judging from his Oxfordy intelletually provocative appearances on TV, I don’t think it bothered him much.

Ladies, I’m no Hitch. As Stephen Colbert once said, "I love all women. In fact some of my best parents are women". But desperate times call for desperate measures. Never mind the comic introduction. The subject I am about to reflect on is one of serious social, economic, political and cultural ramifications.

About a month ago, a young Moroccan teenager named Amina committed suicide after facing the unliveable reality of living with the man who allegedly raped her. The non-Moroccans of you might think it was possible because of an abduction or a kidnapping. And it was so, in many aspects. But in the Human Rights wonderland where I live, a man who raped a woman finds himself with more than one option : go to jail (where Karma is likely to hit him with the same offense he commited), or use the Get-Out-Of-Jail-Free card that the Moroccan Justice system has granted him : marry his victim. As soon as Amina’s case broke out, the outrage of Moroccan feminists was paralleled by the conservatism of conspiracy theorists who liked to suggest that there was no evidence of rape. In other words, the sixteen year old’s sexual encounter with the rapist may have been consensual (in your face, Statutory Rape). Beyond the absurdity of arguments thrown here and there, one question stuck to my mind for weeks : Why are we discussing this just now ?!

Morocco is not Saudi Arabia. Women here can actively contribute to economic development at all levels. But in society, their intellectual, professional and economic well-being is not the major determinant of their status. In fact, it accounts for little of society's recognition to them. In Morocco, as in many other high-context, collectivist societies, you are not fully a woman until you get yourself a husband and you both start to repopulate the Earth (don't hate yet, ladies; you know I'm right). The liberalization of lifestyles that allowed gender roles to overlap has overshadowed the very heavy weight that Moroccan families, media and even institutions put on a girl's shoulders as early as childhood.

When defending their hardly secured right to self-determination, women in my country like to point at various social symbols. Some blame men, others silently blame religion. A broader category, on the other hand, adopts an all-encompassing approach. The latter consists of putting all the blame on that thing called "society". Can't go out at night? Society. Can't move up the corporate ladder? Society. Can't have a love life out of marriage? Society. Can't get more than half a man's inheritance? Society. Somehow in the middle of all that finger-pointing, Moroccan feminists seemed to forget that women in fact constitute half of that Society they blame so much. I have given this so much thought and still cannot think of it any other way: in 21st Century Morocco, only women are to blame for their miseries.

This is a country where just 9 years ago, the husband was the unequivocal boss in the house and could actually enforce that reality by law. This is a country where only a man (actually, "The Man") was able to put it into law that husband and wife ought to have equal status in the household they constitute. And the only reason Moroccans got along with it was that they had no choice. I like to joke that if Morocco was a democracy back then (which it is still not), a referendum on women's rights would be rejected by the same percentage that adopted 2011's new Constitution. More alarmingly, this is a country where women expect men to grant them rights and privileges that do not always suit the latter. Our freshly elected Prime Minister got busted for only having one woman in his ideologically heteregenous government. So sadly, this is also a country where a lot of women expect things to be handed to them just because they are women. News flash, ladies. Unless you get up and fight for what you believe in, nobody will give it up. Actually even if you do fight for it, chances are you are not always going to get what you want. A whole timeline of Evolution is available as evidence.

Speaking of Evolution, have Moroccan women ever wondered why American, British or French women are more empowered than they are? Could it be because their men are more attentionate than ours? Or is it - to bring out the paternalistic perspective - because they are actually less manly than ours? I can assure you any woman living in these countries would be offended at the suggestion. Western women too were socially, economically and politically oppressed not so long ago. They had limited rights to property, were paid less than men and could not even dream of having their voice heard in elections. The economic patronage that Western society had over women had obvious socio-psychological repercussions on what they were to expect from life. As a result, the feminist grassroots movements that saw the light in the early 20th century did not just seek the acquisition of basic rights. The results of their struggles, civil disobedience and active militantism are engraved in the founding documents of their nations. After the American Woman Suffrage Association lobbied for the 19th Amendment to the US Constitution in 1920, no American politician since then could get into office without addressing women's issues. But then that was not it. Western women understood that in order to bargain on equal grounds on any social matter, they had to secure fundamental economic and individual rights. It took women in the West no less than 50 years to obtain landmark legislation such as the Equal Pay Act or legal precedents such as Roe V. Wade. The latter, empowering women over what happens inside their bodies, was to set the tone of social expectations from them for the ensuing years. Because you know that whenever women's rights are on the menu, sex is always around the corner...

And that to me is what hampers Moroccan feminists the most: they just cannot spell it out. Theirs is a high-context feminism, pointing at the symptoms of women's struggles rather than their causes. In Morocco, even the most educated, most financially secure and successful woman does not have full control over her destiny because she does not have the freedom to choose how she lives her private life. Social expectations, backed by Sharia-based personal status laws, are there to make sure of that. Therefore instead of being a decisive choice that one makes at the culmination of their fulfillment, marriage is often seen in Morocco as a necessary evil. A shield for social approval and respectability. Never mind if your life becomes a living hell later. After all, you're married, aren't you? In their disorganized and heavily coded discourse, Moroccan feminists left an obvious void, now filled by the most conservative voices. The only woman in the Moroccan government is in fact in charge of women's and family issues. An Islamist, and a hard core one at that. Since her appointment, Bassima Hakkaoui symbolized political loyalty by siding with her party rather than her gender. After sixteen year old Amina's suicide, she openly came out against abolishing Article 475 of the Moroccan penal code, which introduces marriage as an alternative to cancelling rape charges. As much as I wonder what planet this officeholder lives in, I actually admire her genuineness. Because unlike any Moroccan feminist, she does speak her mind, in a language that needs little interpretation.

In the blockbuster movie What Women Want, Mel Gibson played the role of a man who suddenly finds himself hearing women's thoughts. Sometimes when I hear and watch Moroccan feminists, it seems to me as if they think I and all other Moroccan men are Mel Gibsons. We're not. And even if we were able to decipher women's aspirations without their clearly articulating them, more than half of us would actually fight those.

Moroccan feminists do remarkable work on the ground. They mobilize in associations, volunteer to provide food, shelter, health & education for orphans, help women in rural areas make a living by providing easier access to microcredit... But those honorable deeds end up being just part of damage control. Damage created as a result of centuries of hypocritical social expectations from women, reinforced by women themselves. This country does not need another teenage suicide for women to start seriously debating what is it they want their place in society to be. Decisions are made by those who show up.