---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
summary: My country’s constitution grants me secrecy of content in my electoral choices. But in an era of open information, Internet-triggered revolutions and popular uprisings, it is near impossible to fake one’s stand on fundamental matters. My generation’s increasing need for genuine and authentic politics is consistent with my need for a clearer view of the world around me. Neither you nor I should have to justify why we think or believe the way we do. But today, I feel it’s time to make an exception.
title: Why I Almost Voted For The Islamists
---

My country’s constitution grants me secrecy of content in my electoral choices. But in an era of open information, Internet-triggered revolutions and popular uprisings, it is near impossible to fake one’s stand on fundamental matters. My generation’s increasing need for genuine and authentic politics is consistent with my need for a clearer view of the world around me. Neither you nor I should have to justify why we think or believe the way we do. But today, I feel it’s time to make an exception.

The reason I say “almost” is because I was out of my hometown. Had that not been the case, I am certain that I would have gone to the voting booth, double-crossed the lantern sign (referring to the Justice and Development Party) and put it in the ballot with a big smile on my face. “What?”

I would hardly come across as a religious person, let alone an Islamist. I drink (diet) Coke, listen to U2, wear jeans and hang out wearing iPod earbuds. My favourite outfit of all times are the 1960s suits the Execs wear on “Mad Men”. I went to College in a Liberal Arts University, where I decided from the beginning to wipe out my mind clean of anything the Moroccan education system had taught me (except the Math, of course). Before turning 20, I was taught the very enjoyable art of critical thinking and research. Through literature, I was introduced to Socrates, Plato, Rousseau, Hemingway, Lincoln, Churchill, Kant, Nietzsche, Adam Smith, Marx, Fisher, Weber, Hume, Kotler, Sartre… Nice bunch. They did things to my mind. Most importantly, they made me realize that Truth cannot be found only in one place: not only in religion, not only in science, not only on CNN, not only on Aljazeera, and most certainly not on RTM or 2M. While finding out things, scepticism was my method. While thinking of the world around me, I envisioned a life of knowledge, virtue, cooperation and progress. At 22, I turned out to be a hard-core leftist Liberal. Needless to say, I despised anything the Islamists had to say. Yet I was not aware that the way I viewed them was the function of many variables, ranging from the US State Department, to Telquel Magazine’s flaming prose, to the Moroccan Ministry of Interior’s mass imprisonment of anyone Bin Ladinish… It was inconceivable to me and many of my peers that a political movement based on religion would last that long. Meanwhile, PJD was not only surviving every blow, but getting stronger and stronger. 

In 2007, a bald nerd-looking career bureaucrat named Fouad Ali El Himma “resigned” from his post as Moroccan Interior Minister after a life of faithful public service within the most powerful and significant Moroccan institution. Primary-Secondary-High School-College buddies with Mohammed VI, this guy had the brilliant idea to get into politics, the very field he was tasked to watch, censor and control when he was at the Mother of all Ministries. The effect was like the Big Bang. With a bunch of comrades from his constituency of Rhamna, El Himma founded a miniature political party to get elected to Parliament. Then, he started raffling MPs from other parties, who were more than excited to leave their parties and be partners with the King’s friend (After all, a man’s gotta look after himself, right?). Together, they founded the Movement for All Democrats, to be later named the Party for Authenticity and Modernity (PAM). During the late 2000s, PAM was the trend of the day. Everybody wanted in, and they could easily get in. The “party” functioned like the tractor that was its symbol: it established a powerful base of educated young executives and won the subsequent regional elections of 2009 in an unprecedented landslide. Intellectuals, opinion-makers and businessmen admired and supported it for its corporate-like management, focused on results and efficiency. The political sphere, on the other hand, had every reason to attack it. PAM was confusing a political arena that was already turned upside down. In a country where it is rare to find a political party with a discernable political ideology, there was no telling what El Himma’s bunch stood for. You could not tell whether they were conservative or liberal, whether they were for a welfare state or a market-oriented style of government, whether they were for the extension of civil liberties or not… You could not, in other words, place PAM in a political spectrum. Its leadership liked to retort that it was there to “serve the country”, unaware that there were different ideas on how to do so. It was, to sum up, a gathering of technocrats disguised as militants. Moroccans unfortunately allowed themselves to get fooled by that impression for 2 years. But then something happened.

Wikileaks exposed the causes of the Middle East’s misery. El Bouaazizi burned himself. Ben Ali left. Mubarak left. Kaddafi was killed. We all know the story. When Middle Easterns were given the opportunity to freely express their will, one trend was common to all. Islamist parties flourished. The pattern was too obvious to be rendered insignificant. From Hamas to Ennahda to the Muslim Brotherhood, it looked like Islamists did not even need to campaign in order to take over government. The treachery was evident: the only reason Islamists were always in the opposition was that the regimes within which they were operating employed repression and ballot-rigging. There was then no need to wonder why the US, France or Britain were fond of people like Ben Ali, Kaddafi or Mubarak. And then it hit me. If Islamists were that bad, why on earth were they so popular?

It did not take me much to understand that if you take out the strictly spiritual component of their discourse, Islamists are not that different from leftists. They both fight for social justice and equal opportunity. And in case you are tempted to bring out the inheritance issue, I challenge any Moroccan “secular” out there to campaign on the basis of equal inheritance for both genders. Journalists will root for it, Intellectuals will defend it. But no politician is suicidal enough to adopt it. Moroccan Islamists also appear to encourage women more than other parties. In fact, in the current government, they were the only ones to nominate a female minister. Secular much? But then you would tell me, you do have Socialists in Morocco, don’t you? Yes. They had their chance. And they failed miserably, probably because of the numerous temptations that officeholders are faced with.

Yet one thing fascinates me the most about Islamists in my country. They have a deeply rooted aversion for corruption, nepotism and clientelism, the very sources of immobilism in Morocco. You see it in their conventions and the way they choose their leadership. No Fassi Fihri-like family appointments. Islamists make this a matter of life and death. And if religion is the source of their opposition to it, it’s good enough for me.

I know what you’re thinking. Yes, the value system of Islamists is anything but progressive. But which country are we talking about? Isn’t it the one that constitutionally defines itself as a Muslim Kingdom under the guidance of the Commander of the Faithful? Isn’t it the one where if you are dating someone, a policeman is still required by law to ask for your papers in order to check whether you are married? Isn’t it the one where magazines are fined for publishing religious jokes? If this is the Morocco you are talking about, then the ethical tendencies of Islamists should be the least of your worries.

Everybody saw it coming. Morocco was no exception to the rule. The hilarious part of Morocco’s 2011 General Elections was that eight parties had to team up in order to counter the Islamist influence. Not two. Not four. Eight. It tells a lot about who you are when your only aim is to stop someone instead of promoting what you believe in. The so-called “G8” was literally composed of the bulk of the Moroccan old guard, former ministers, MPs and bureaucrats who had a hard time understanding the concept of retirement. Not surprisingly, PAM was part of it, along with other regime-engineered political entities. This time, however, Moroccans sent a loud and clear message: Get Out.

I particularly admired the way the Monarchy handled the Islamist victory. PJD’s Number 1 was swiftly appointed Prime Minister. El Himma was taken out of Politics and put back where he has always belonged: at the service of His Majesty. More importantly, life went on. No bars were closed, no clubs were ripped of their booze. And girls still went outside heads uncovered, with their Zara jeans and Louboutin high heels. Just how I like’em. The Islamist phobia seemed like a nightmare during a bad night’s sleep, mostly insignificant.

The most successful political movements have always been the ones able to capture and absorb popular outcry, then translate it in institutions through legislation. Ask Ghandi. Ask Clinton. Ask Erdugan. Ask Obama (you all saw that one coming, didn’t you?). Ask Hania in Palestine. The Justice and Development Party has fulfilled the first criterion of a successful political movement. And while it strives to fulfil the second, it does deserve respect and consideration.
