---
layout: post
author: Hakima Taoufiq
category: politics
date: 2012-10-10 22:17:51
summary: I have a dream that one day -in my lifetime- Muslims live out the true meaning of Islam, that they answer the first duty call of their religion &#58; to read, seek knowledge and wipe out illiteracy for this was the very first word and verse revealed to the Prophet. That they read with open hearts before they utter the words in their lips. That they seek truths from the holy books, philosophy essays and even within children's questions and wonders, seek knowledge from the East to the West, for knowledge has no boundaries, and finally, that they recall that "One hour's meditation on the work of the Creator is better than seventy years of prayer" (Muhammad PBUH)
title: My "I Have a Dream"
---


I have a dream...

I have a dream that one day, in my lifetime, Muslims live out the true meaning of Islam, that they answer the first duty call of their religion: to read, seek knowledge and wipe out illiteracy for this was the very first word and verse revealed to the Prophet. That they read with open hearts before they utter the words in their lips. That they seek truths from the holy books, philosophy essays and even within children's questions and wonders, seek knowledge from the East to the West, for knowledge has no boundaries, and finally, that they recall that "One hour's meditation on the work of the Creator is better than seventy years of prayer" (Muhammad PBUH)

I have a dream that one day Islam becomes again synonymous with its etymological stem: peace and surrendering to God's will. That Muslims live up to their religion as it was brought onto them by the Prophet Muhammad PBUH, while reviving 3 simple rules: 

# care for your fellow neighbors regardless of their race/color/ethnicity/religion/gender/age… or as Mother Teresa put it: "how can you love God whom you can't see if you do not love your neighbor with whom you live,"
# feed the poor, and 
# devote some of your time to God: to think, find your purpose, feed your soul.

I have a dream that one day I will see more and more inter-racial Muslim marriages: Sunnis and Shii'as, Africans and Caucasians, Arabs and Asians, Turks and Persians - for Islam has never differentiated between people's color, language or ethnicity.

I have a dream that one day when a Muslim woman is elected head of a major ministry in a non Muslim-majority country, this ceases to be celebrated as the exception to the rule, sparking news articles to justify this choice. Rather, that such a laudable event is viewed in its secular individuality.

I have a dream that one day the death of a human being ceases to be discounted at different discount rates depending on the race/ethnicity/religion of the victim, that the media mourns the death of a Palestinian child, a Syrian dad or an Afghan mother just like they mourn the death of a US ambassador or an Israeli soldier.

I have a dream that one day the gap between the Eastern and Western narratives narrows, that both sides get to treat each other with the dignity, respect and empathy that very human being deserves. That they shy away from the labels, cliches and prejudices that have polluted our respective environments for decades.

Now, I know I am a big dreamer. I have been dubbed a ridiculous optimist, an ostentatious idealist…you name it.  Yet, as a deliberately candid-minded woman, I must say that if a quarter century of existence has taught me something so far it's that dreams do come true, provided you hold on to them and do something about them when you wake up...

Amiin.
