
---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
summary: In Morocco, the attempts of a civil rights group to decriminalize daytime eating in Ramadan were met by the patronizing persecution of an overly conservative public. Why the restriction of civil liberties through religion is not the religious thing to do.
title: Leave God Out Of It 
--- 

On the night of the notorious Islamist victory in Morocco's 2011 general election, I called my father to chat about what had just happened to my country's political landscape. I did not dare to ask him about his vote, for fear of finding out that political ideology was somehow genetically transmitted. The closeted leftist in me certainly did not want to find out that my father voted for the Justice and Development Party and was thus part of the large wave of Islamization that the Middle East and North Africa was gradually encountering thanks to the Arab Spring. In that phone conversation, I openly expressed my concern that the very well established political movements in Morocco - which comprise a large array of ideologies ranging from right wing Nationalism to populist Leftism - would find themselves in a risk of irrelevance in the face of a political movement only based on religion. My father paused long enough to deliver one of his usual pieces of transgenerational mockery: "Son, if you doubt that Islam is a political ideology, then you still didn't get it."

I never liked to talk about religion. The very subject brings out people's egos in a very unpleasant manner. Where I come from, you can be discussing any matter with the most educated, most intellectually enlightened and socially outgoing person and they would wave the religious card at you whenever they feel that they have exhausted their ammo of rational arguments. Such a tactical move would consist of citing a religious text and actively anticipating your reaction. If you dare to suggest that the interpretation of religious texts is adaptable to human Evolution, you are very likely to be profiled as an outspoken proponent of the Zionist takeover of the Universe. On the other hand if you stop arguing, you lose the argument. And I hate to lose. 

I was put in a similar situation about six weeks ago. As many of you are aware, one of the five pillars of Islam is fasting during the Holy month of Ramadan. In Morocco, that same pillar is not just left to the realm of religion, but very much enforced through the country's penal code. In other words, no Moroccan shall eat in public at daytime during Ramadan. The penalty for such a "misdemeanor" is up to six months of jail time, courtesy of a schizophrenic legislation. Because if you think Article 222 I just mentioned stems from religious law, you got it wrong. For those of you not familiar with the Moroccan penal code, let me elaborate a little on its sources. Much of it does come from religion, like the (official) prohibition of alcohol and adultery. A lot of it is the remnant of colonization-era French and Spanish civil codes. But some of it is pretty much the direct result of a misogynistic culture of government, the origins of which I have a hard time finding in the History of Humanity. Example? Article 475: if you happen to rape a lady, you can either go to jail or... marry her. So let's just get this out of the way: in spite of its constitutional status as a Muslim country, Morocco is not governed by Islamic Law. Interestingly enough, the latter contains no specific punishment for breaking the fast in Ramadan. All Muslims are required to do in seeking forgiveness from God (not the state) is expiate themselves either by fasting two months or feeding 60 poor people. You can then imagine my awe when in 2012 of all years, after all the taboos broken by the Arab Spring, a movement claiming the right to eat in public regardless of what month it is finds itself popularly prosecuted on religious grounds. The struggle of the "ماصايمينش" (We're Not Fasting) movement to get its message through in Moroccan society was yet another example of how religion is unduly used by various social segments as a tool for moral leverage.

It all started on Facebook. This sounds like the beginning of a love story. It's anything but. By mid-July 2012, the noise that the “ماصايمينش” movement was making around itself failed to be duly reported by the country’s official and semi-official media channels, thanks to a well assimilated rule of self-censorship. Not on social media. In a virtual realm where anyone can publish anything, the popular outcry against the movement took a violent turn in the form of insults and threats via various Facebook groups. One night, a Muslim friend of mine openly expressed his support to “ماصايمينش” on the social networking site, arguing that fasting did not prevent him from respecting the natural right of others to eat whenever and wherever they please. Comments multiplied exponentially. One particular comment was interesting enough for me to read over and over again. Short, yet striking with its incoherence. According to its author, “ماصايمينش” was willingly provoking the religious sentiment of Muslim majorities by claiming the right to eat in public. What was extremely shocking to me in this case was not the unfounded substance of the rebuttal, but the fact that it was uttered by a College graduate. This guy had graduated from the same University I had been to, and had in the process of obtaining his degree taken classes in Critical Thinking, Anthropology, Philosophy, History and Mathematics. All the material necessary for you to think of life around you in a structured manner. Now I do not mind coming across brokered pieces of mediocre reasoning from time to time. My usual response is to just roll my eyes and curse the darkness. But enough was enough. I admittedly lost all sense of human empathy while publicly ridiculing this gentleman on the Web. The conversation turned into a battle of thoughts in which my purpose was to prove to myself, to him and the tens reading our comments that I was dealing with an intellectually inferior being, which warranted the nerdy sarcasm I was throwing at him. He gently withdrew from the conversation, leaving me to discover that the only test to my open-mindedness was closed-mindedness. But as in every other test of temper, it got me thinking. It’s no wonder Islam is a little weak in the PR department these days: it is often being marketed by the wrong people. 

One can only wonder how a religion which emerged as a liberator of Mankind from ignorance and bigotry ended up centuries later being portrayed as the very hearth of it. Islam forbade slavery a millennium before Abraham Lincoln put an end to it in America. Islam advocated fair market practices and prohibited speculation and interest rates way before the ambient disgust with Wall Street’s greed. Islam, above all, was the first monotheistic religion to acknowledge the diversity of confessions around it and guarantee religious freedom in text. “No Coercion in Religion” (Al-Baqarah [2]: 256). Islam at its beginnings was the equivalent of the Civil Rights movement in the 1960s. It challenged the status quo in a region where clinging to one’s ethnic and racial biases was the established norm. Freedom was at the core of its message to Humanity. I have a hard time imagining that Prophet Mohammed and his followers would have thought of imprisoning those who were not so interested in foregoing nutrition from dawn to sunset during Ramadan. It would have been contradictory to the founding principles of their religion in the first place. 

