---
layout: post
author: Zouhair Mazouz
category: politics
date: 2013-1-1 13:46:48
summary: Tunisians have been credited with setting up a chain reaction of events that are changing the Middle East and North Africa for good. A traveler's perspective on why it was all bound to start in Tunisia, and the sacrifices required.
title: What It Takes
---

December 2nd, 2012. I get out of a three hour flight to Tunis and do not feel a slight change in landscape or environment. Except maybe for one thing. At the airport was a large crowd gathered as if it was waiting for somebody. In a matter of seconds, a man wrapped in a Tunisian flag walks in, triggering applause, hurrays and hugs from sympathizers. Holding what seemed to be socialist flags, they sing the Tunisian National anthem as wholeheartedly as one could. I look at the security officer next to me and sense a mixed reaction. He smiles, then shrugs his shoulders. Interestingly, his body language was quite enough to summarize what has been happening in the Middle East and North Africa since the advent of the Arab Spring.

You cannot have a full grasp of the geopolitical changes shaking up the region unless you understand why it started in Tunisia in the first place. And you may have access to all the political, economic, sociological, psychological or ethnographic studies; but nothing matches a random five minute conversation with a citizen. Among Tunisian youth, there seems to be a deep sense of pride and accomplishment in getting rid of someone like Ben Ali. They feel that they truly own what they see as their revolution. Unlike "The Land of Genetically Modified Reforms" (Beghi, 2011) where I come from, Tunisians appear to have quite a clear understanding that their economic, social and governance issues were not problems on their own, but symptoms of a much larger problem. Such an ability to conceptualize and rationalize issues can obviously only be attributed to a successful Education system. Or as a cab driver in Tunis puts it:

"You know, Bourguiba (former Tunisian dictator) may have been a tyrant but over here we like to remember him through his most lasting legacy. He left us with an Education system second to none in Africa. Instead of imitating the French, British or Italians, he took the best out of their respective systems. The State here has always encouraged youth to pursue as many years of schooling as they wish, free of charge. In fact, many end up liking it so much that they work in academia. The starting salary of a professor exceeds $1,000, to be doubled after a few years of experience. My wife earned a PhD and is now a University professor. I only hold a Bachelor in History. I guess that's why I'm driving a cab!"

What struck me most about that conversation was the humility by which the driver described what are clearly very honorable credentials. Credentials that others might use to blackmail the government into granting them public service postings, pending a social crisis. Credentials that I once thought to be a guarantee of socio-economic advancement. The fact that Education is seen by Tunisians as a necessary human attribute rather than a transaction cost for higher status was illustrated in the spontaneous fashion by which they rose to topple a repressive regime. That being said, one can also see the glass as half empty.

You know something is wrong when you come across troops, tanks and masked special forces brigades almost every day. Also daily was the frequency by which my passport was checked by Tunisian police. It was quite obvious that Revolutions, no matter how liberating, tend to leave a safety void to be filled by security services. Demonstrations and strikes were commonplace, to much of the general population's dismay. "It's like people were so much in need of expressing themselves freely that they now exercise that right without thinking. It's annoying sometimes", complained a Tunisian colleague of mine. As someone who likes to whine about the lack of genuine political engagement in his homeland, I was literally shocked when in another cab ride, the Tunisian driver and a Lybian customer congratulated me for the "smooth and subtle" way we Moroccans "handled the uprising". "You King is smart," the Lybian said. "He reads what his people want and gives it to them. No trouble, no violence, no anarchy." Mixed with the joy of freedom was a bit of nostalgia for times when everything was in order because people simply feared for their lives.

It's no secret that we Middle Easterns are just getting started at this. Concepts like rights, liberties, rule of law, separation of powers and representative government are new to us, both in abstract and practical terms. I admittedly do belong to a category of youth who were so fed up with the ambient corruption, oppression and denial in the region that they just wanted it to end, with no consideration of the costs involved. Yet those are heavy, with long-lasting effects. What they also are is a guarantee that when the dust settles, there is no going back.

References:

Beghi, L. (2012). Kingdom of Morocco: The Land of Genetically Modified Reforms! Retrieved January 1st, 2013 from http://lailab.wordpress.com/2012/04/25/kingdom-of-morocco-the-land-of-genetically-modified-reforms/